Add TAG security and privacy questionnaire (#111)
WICG/digital-credentials: explainer.md

```
You can read a more detailed and technical description of the API in the [specification draft](https://wicg.github.io/digital-identities/).

> # Security and Privacy
> 
> See [Security and privacy TAG Questionnaire](security-privacy.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Horizontal reviews

* [Security and privacy TAG Questionnaire](horizontal-reviews/security-privacy.md)
```

- Will existing protocols ([example](https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/issues/125)) adopt this API?
- Will regulation ([example](https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/european-digital-identity-architecture-and-reference-framework-outline)) adopt this API?

# [Self-Review Questionnaire: Security and Privacy](https://w3ctag.github.io/security-questionnaire/)

> 01.  What information does this feature expose,
>      and for what purposes?

> The Digital Credential API exposes a one-time user-mediated end-to-end encrypted communication channel from websites, to digital wallet applications, and back to websites. It is designed to be a better option than established lower-level communication channels like custom schemes, QR codes, and server-to-server network communication. How exactly this channel is used is up to the wallet applications and host operating system, but we are designing it to be suitable for conveying presentations of digital credentials such as claims in mobile driver’s licenses.

Reviewer 2: "The Digital Credential API exposes a one-time user-mediated end-to-end encrypted communication channel from websites, to digital wallet applications, and back to websites." is the sentence that jumped out at me @RByers FWIW

Author: Yes thank you @bc-pi, I agree that was misleading. I corrected it to "with end-to-end encryption of the response".

> The Digital Credential API exposes a one-time user-mediated communication channel from websites, to digital wallet applications, and back to websites with end-to-end encryption of the response. It is designed to be a better option than established lower-level communication channels like custom schemes, QR codes, and server-to-server network communication. How exactly this channel is used is up to the wallet applications and host operating system, but we are designing it to be suitable for conveying presentations of digital credentials such as claims in mobile driver’s licenses.

Reviewer 3: Do we mean "end-to-end encryption" here, or are we just trying to say "secure channel". 

IOW, not all secure channels need to use end-to-end encryption and end-to-end encryption isn't required for all use cases (transmitting a movie ticket, for example).

Author: Right, this depends on our debate in #109. Perhaps for now I should remove the mention of encryption here for now?

> The Digital Credential API exposes a one-time user-mediated communication channel from websites, to digital wallet applications, and back to websites with end-to-end encryption of the response. It is designed to be a better option than established lower-level communication channels like custom schemes, QR codes, and server-to-server network communication. How exactly this channel is used is up to the wallet applications and host operating system, but we are designing it to be suitable for conveying presentations of digital credentials such as claims in mobile driver’s licenses.

Reviewer: Although it's good to talk about the "communication channel" through which the API works, this doesn't exactly answer what *information the feature exposes*. 

In the first sentence, I was expecting to read something like "high-value privacy sensitive digital credentials, such as digital driver's licenses... it does this through a one-time user-mediated communication channel from websites..." 

Generally, we should try other the answers specific to the questions being asked. We probably don't need to give justification for the decisions taken (i.e., why it's a better option than custom schemes, QR codes, etc), as we've covered those in other documents (which we should probably link to).

Author: Agreed with the first part and updated. 

I'm not sure I agree about only answering directly. We keep getting people presuming that we are seeking to enable exposure of this information (and arguing against the legitimacy of the use case), when in fact all we're doing is trying to replace existing exposure with safer mechanisms. So I'm just trying to head off the immediate criticisms I know we'll get. But perhaps I've overdone it?

> 02.  Do features in your specification expose the minimum amount of information
>      necessary to implement the intended functionality?

> A primary use case of the digital credentials API is for selective disclosure of identity properties such as a cryptographic attestation that the user holds a California driver’s license of an adult. The use of selective disclosure, however, is a decision for the verifier website, wallet, and credential issuer, based on the use case. There are legitimate scenarios, such as creating or recovering an account on a government website, where uniquely identifiable and potentially non-resettable PII might be exposed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A primary use case of the digital credentials API is selective disclosure of identity properties, such as a cryptographic attestation that the user holds a California driver’s license for an adult. The use of selective disclosure, however, is a decision for the verifier website, wallet, and credential issuer, based on the use case. There are legitimate scenarios, such as creating or recovering an account on a government website, where uniquely identifiable and potentially non-resettable PII might be exposed.
```

Author: Thanks

> A primary use case of the digital credentials API is for selective disclosure of identity properties such as a cryptographic attestation that the user holds a California driver’s license of an adult. The use of selective disclosure, however, is a decision for the verifier website, wallet, and credential issuer, based on the use case. There are legitimate scenarios, such as creating or recovering an account on a government website, where uniquely identifiable and potentially non-resettable PII might be exposed.

Reviewer: A reader might wonder why when we talk about "use of selective disclosure" but exclude mention of the end user. IMO, it's important to mention the role of the user there.   

Nit: expand the acronym PII.

Reviewer 4: Might as well be explicit about the nit...
```suggestion
A primary use case of the digital credentials API is for selective disclosure of identity properties such as a cryptographic attestation that the user holds a California driver’s license of an adult. The use of selective disclosure, however, is a decision for the verifier website, wallet, and credential issuer, based on the use case. There are legitimate scenarios, such as creating or recovering an account on a government website, where uniquely identifiable and potentially non-resettable personally identifiable information (PII) might be exposed.
```

Author: Thanks. Tweaked to focus on empowering users while also highlighting that it's up to the verifier website to say what information it needs.

> The API is designed to expect the use of response encryption so that this PII is exposed only to the requesting server and not any code running in the web page or browser. It is an [open question](https://github.com/WICG/digital-identities/issues/109) whether this response encryption is something we can reasonably enforce at this layer or not.

Reviewer 5: ```
whether this response encryption is something we can reasonably enforce at this layer or not.
```

It doesn't seem to me like it is an open question whether this layer can strictly enforce response encryption: it can't.

There is nothing that the browser layer can do (outside of curated allowlists) to circumvent a malicious (or not) wallet from returning the response in plain text.

Reviewer 5: I expanded on this a bit more here: https://github.com/WICG/digital-identities/issues/109#issuecomment-2096424454

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The API is designed to expect the use of response encryption so that this PII is exposed only to the requesting server and not to any code running in the web page or browser. It is an [open question](https://github.com/WICG/digital-identities/issues/109) whether such response encryption is something we can reasonably enforce at this layer or not.
```

Author: > It doesn't seem to me like it is an open question whether this layer can strictly enforce response encryption: it can't.

Changed "enforce" to "require". As discussed in the issue, our spec could require it even if that can't be technically enforced.

The API is also designed to require request transparency to enable user agents and operating systems to appropriately inform users about the level of privacy risk involved in the request. A major area of outstanding work is to outline in the specification our privacy and security guidance to implementers, but we already know that the [Chromium implementation](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1L68tmNXCQXucsCV8eS8CBd_F9FZ6TNwKNOaFkA8RfwI/edit) intends to show users stronger warnings in riskier scenarios such as those that lack the use of selective disclosure.

> 03.  Do the features in your specification expose personal information,
>      personally-identifiable information (PII), or information derived from
>      either?

> Yes, the API is designed to help facilitate communication of PII from secure wallet applications to verifier web servers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yes. The API is designed to help facilitate communication of PII from wallet applications to verifier web servers, through a relying party (a web application). 
```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Yes. The API is designed to help facilitate communication of personally identifiable information (PII) from secure wallet applications to verifier web servers, through a relying party (a web application). 
```

> 04.  How do the features in your specification deal with sensitive information?

> Today, online identity verification (e.g., for KYC) is usually done by submitting photos of government identity documents (for example, uploading photos containing the PII via the web’s `<input type=file>` mechanism. Due to the privacy and security limits of this approach, credential issuers and verifiers are working to move to the use of wallet applications which can selectively disclose cryptographically-attested properties. Today, those approaches rely on generic web→app communication paths like custom schemes and server-to-server communication. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Today, online identity verification (e.g., for KYC) is usually done by submitting photos of government identity documents (for example, uploading photos containing the PII via the web’s `<input type=file>` mechanism. Due to the privacy and security limits of this approach, credential issuers and verifiers are working to move to the use of wallet applications which can selectively disclose cryptographically-attested properties. Today, those approaches rely on generic web-to-app communication paths like custom schemes and server-to-server communication. 
```

> Today, online identity verification (e.g., for KYC) is usually done by submitting photos of government identity documents (for example, uploading photos containing the PII via the web’s `<input type=file>` mechanism. Due to the privacy and security limits of this approach, credential issuers and verifiers are working to move to the use of wallet applications which can selectively disclose cryptographically-attested properties. Today, those approaches rely on generic web→app communication paths like custom schemes and server-to-server communication. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, online identity verification (e.g., for know your customer (KYC)) is usually done by submitting photos of government identity documents (for example, uploading photos containing the PII via the web’s `<input type=file>` mechanism. Due to the privacy and security limits of this approach, credential issuers and verifiers are working to move to the use of wallet applications which can selectively disclose cryptographically-attested properties. Today, those approaches rely on generic web→app communication paths like custom schemes and server-to-server communication. 
```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Today, online identity verification (e.g., for know your customer (KYC)) is usually done by submitting photos of government identity documents. This is commonly done by users uploading photos containing the personally identifiable information (PII) using the web’s `<input type=file>` or similar mechanisms. Due to the privacy, security, and usability limits of this approach, credential issuers and verifiers are working to move to the use of wallet applications that can selectively disclose cryptographically-attested properties. Today, those approaches rely on generic browser-to-native-application communication paths, such as custom URL schemes and/or server-to-server communication.
```

> Today, online identity verification (e.g., for KYC) is usually done by submitting photos of government identity documents (for example, uploading photos containing the PII via the web’s `<input type=file>` mechanism. Due to the privacy and security limits of this approach, credential issuers and verifiers are working to move to the use of wallet applications which can selectively disclose cryptographically-attested properties. Today, those approaches rely on generic web→app communication paths like custom schemes and server-to-server communication. 

Reviewer: Generally: I'm worried that this is again tryin to justify why this is a good idea, rather than answering the question being asked. If possible, let's stick strictly to addressing the question not in relation to how it's better than existing approaches. Or, at least, let's de-emphasize the old methods.

Author: Agreed we should focus first on answering the question directly, I tweaked it for that. But I also think we need to put the answer in context of the larger shifts that our outside our control, right? Otherwise it just looks like it's begging for a "nope, that's dangerous" reaction, right?

The use of wallets aims to improve on the status quo of uploading images in a number of ways:

>  * Enable the use of selective disclosure (eg. for more privacy-friendly age 18+ verification)

Reviewer 2: something about being able to do key binding proof of possession?

```suggestion
 * Enable the use of selective disclosure (eg. for more privacy-friendly age 18+ verification)
 * Enable the wallet to demonstrate legitimate possession of a credential by proving possession of key material bound to that credential
```

Author: Agreed, thanks you!

Reviewer 2: I might have gotten lost in the various updates to the PR but don't think anything for this made it in?

>  * Enable end-to-end PII encryption between the wallet application and the relevant verification server

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 * Enable end-to-end personally identifiable information (PII) encryption between the wallet application and the relevant verification server
```

 * Enable request authentication, where a wallet is required to cryptographically verify that the requester has permission to access the credential

> Further, this specification aims to improve over the existing communication channels used by websites to talk to wallet apps by:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Further, this specification aims to improve over the existing communication channels websites use to talk to wallet apps by:
```

 * Enabling browsers and operating systems to provide meaningful credential selection and permission screens to users, prior to wallet applications becoming aware of the presentation request

>  * Securely communicating the origin of the requesting site to the wallet application, so that it can implement its own MITM protection with support of WebPKI

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 * Securely communicating the origin of the requesting site to the wallet application, so that it can implement its own MITM (man-in-the-middle) protection with support of WebPKI
```

 * Enabling browsers to inspect requests and provide additional UI affordances to users

> 05.  Do the features in your specification introduce state
>      that persists across browsing sessions?

No. In particular, the current scope is just about credential presentation (read-only). We have had requests to expand scope to consider credential issuance APIs but no work has begun on that.

> 06.  Do the features in your specification expose information about the
>      underlying platform to origins?

> Not directly. Wallets may (intentionally or inadvertently) expose some information through this API (such as some indication of which wallet app the user is using). But the primary motivation for these wallets over traditional federated authentication systems is that the wallet can act in the user’s interest to protect their privacy even from the credential issuer. Issuers generally choose which wallets to support their credentials in and can impose privacy requirements on those wallets. Users will often have their choice of multiple wallets and are expected to use reputation for privacy as part of their decision making.

Reviewer: This paints a very optimistic picture / best case scenario of wallets doing the right thing. 

Although from the outset this says states that wallets "may (intentionally or inadvertently) expose some information through this API", we should probably outline a worst case scenario. 

Like, this could speak about the response data being standardized to be structured in a particular way (even if the browser can't directly peek at the encrypted response data).

Author: Yeah I can emphasize the risk more. I also added a statement referring to discussion in #117.

> Not directly. Wallets may (intentionally or inadvertently) expose some information through this API (such as some indication of which wallet app the user is using). But the primary motivation for these wallets over traditional federated authentication systems is that the wallet can act in the user’s interest to protect their privacy even from the credential issuer. Issuers generally choose which wallets to support their credentials in and can impose privacy requirements on those wallets. Users will often have their choice of multiple wallets and are expected to use reputation for privacy as part of their decision making.

Reviewer 6: I would strike the sentence in here about what issuers will generally do, since I don't think it's true across all credential types (and perhaps wouldn't really even have a meaningful effect, if credentials are thereafter shared with any RP of choice, e.g., "shared with another wallet acting as an RP").

Issuers can and do certainly make wallet suggestions, but focusing on the user making the ultimate choices here seems better.

```suggestion
Not directly. Wallets may (intentionally or inadvertently) expose some information through this API (such as some indication of which wallet app the user is using). But the primary motivation for these wallets over traditional federated authentication systems is that the wallet can act in the user’s interest to protect their privacy even from the credential issuer. Users will often have their choice of multiple wallets and are expected to use reputation for privacy as part of their decision making.
```

Reviewer 4: As a user, I do not want to have 25 credential issuers where each may require a different wallet. Physical wallets are chosen strictly by their users, and they contain whatever physical credentials the user wants to insert. Digital wallets should have roughly the same characteristics.

Reviewer 6: @TallTed,

Agreed. Nevermind the potential tracking problem with having each issuer require use of their own app. Such an approach would really just be the two party model again and rely on trust in software instead of credentials and cryptographic proofs, recreating problems that the three party model was designed to mitigate.

Author: As much as that might be what we'd like to happen, that doesn't seem to be what's happening in some major deployments such as EUDI right? Under eIDAS each memeber state will, I believe, certify one or more wallets and certainly not support issuing EUDI credentials into any wallet of the user's choosing.

Nevertheless I agree that users should come first, so I've swapped them. I've also relaxed "generally" to "may".

> 07.  Does this specification allow an origin to send data to the underlying
>      platform?

Yes. The credential presentation request is sent to the underlying platform to mediate.

> 08.  Do features in this specification enable access to device sensors?

> No

Reviewer 5: I'm wondering if this answer would change if we included the cross-device flows, where bluetooth is used to prove proximity?

Reviewer 7: Technically it would be a different protocol and different specification.

Reviewer 5: > Technically it would be a different protocol and different specification.

But if this specification uses another specification that does allow access to device sensors, then transitively it does too.

Reviewer: Agree with @samuelgoto. It indirectly does. So:
 
```suggestion
Not directly. 
```

And explanation...

Author: Thanks, done

> 09.  Do features in this specification enable new script execution/loading
>      mechanisms?

> No

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No.
```

> 10.  Do features in this specification allow an origin to access other devices?

> Not yet, but we expect to expand the API to enable cross-device presentation flows using the same mechanism used by passkeys ([FIDO CTAP](https://fidoalliance.org/specs/fido-v2.2-rd-20230321/fido-client-to-authenticator-protocol-v2.2-rd-20230321.html).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Not yet, but we expect to expand the API to enable cross-device presentation flows using the same mechanism used by passkeys ([FIDO CTAP](https://fidoalliance.org/specs/fido-v2.2-rd-20230321/fido-client-to-authenticator-protocol-v2.2-rd-20230321.html)).
```

> 11.  Do features in this specification allow an origin some measure of control over
>      a user agent's native UI?

> Not control, no. User agents may add additional affordances for user transparency and control. 

Reviewer 5: Are you discounting the underlying Open System as part of the User Agent?

This specific does allow an origin some measure of control over the OS's UI layer, right (e.g. by opening a bottom sheet with a credential selector?)?

Reviewer: Agree with @samuelgoto ... further, what fields are requested can have significant influence and could potentially be abused (e.g., an RP asking for 100 things in different ways)

> 12.  What temporary identifiers do the features in this specification create or
>      expose to the web?

> None

Reviewer 5: It exposes much worse than temporary identifiers, right? It exposes some permanent ones, like social security numbers and driver's licenses numbers, right?

Reviewer 4: I *think* the exposure of those non-temporary a/k/a permanent identifiers is discussed in the answers to other questions. *This* question asks specifically about temporary identifiers, and I do not think it makes sense to change its direction.

Author: Yep that was my reading too. That said, like for other questions, I think we should acknowledge that wallets might create temporary identifiers. I've added a sentence with mdoc MSOs as a possible example (given concern over mdoc selective disclosures being potentially linkable through MSO re-use).

> 13.  How does this specification distinguish between behavior in first-party and
>      third-party contexts?

The API is currently available only in first-party contexts, but there is an [open issue](https://github.com/WICG/digital-identities/issues/78) to explore adding a permission policy to enable requests in third-party contexts.

> 14.  How do the features in this specification work in the context of a browser’s
>      Private Browsing or Incognito mode?

> Like other browser authentication (eg. WebAuthn) and identification (eg. autofill) features, the feature is available to users to use in private browsing. Regardless of whether private browsing is in use, the feature is designed to not communicate information without the user’s explicit permission each and every time it's invoked. There are legitimate use cases for this API in private browsing such as privacy-preserving age verification.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Like other browser authentication (e.g., WebAuthn) and identification (e.g., autofill) features, the feature is available to users to use in private browsing. Regardless of whether private browsing is in use, the feature is designed to not communicate information without the user’s explicit permission each and every time it's invoked. There are legitimate use cases for this API in private browsing such as privacy-preserving age verification.
```

> 15.  Does this specification have both "Security Considerations" and "Privacy
>      Considerations" sections?

Not yet, but it will. The specification is still being written as we incubate the API and gain experience with real-world experiments. 

> 16.  Do features in your specification enable origins to downgrade default
>      security protections?

No

> 17.  What happens when a document that uses your feature is kept alive in BFCache
>      (instead of getting destroyed) after navigation, and potentially gets reused
>      on future navigations back to the document?

Implementations should fail or postpone any requests which occur while the page is not visible to the user. The spec may introduce a [requirement for user activation](https://github.com/WICG/digital-identities/issues/91) which could help with this.

> 18.  What happens when a document that uses your feature gets disconnected?

Probably just silently ignored, but [we'll discuss](https://github.com/WICG/digital-identities/issues/112).

> 19.  What should this questionnaire have asked?

> What are the security and privacy implications of not shipping this feature? How does this feature fit into the larger privacy risk landscape. We believe the feature will lead to a reduced risk relative to the status quo, but this is very subjective and hard to demonstrate difinitively. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
What are the security and privacy implications of not shipping this feature? How does this feature fit into the larger privacy risk landscape? We believe the feature will lead to a reduced risk relative to the status quo, but this is very subjective and hard to demonstrate definitively.
```

> 01.  What information does this feature expose,
>      and for what purposes?

The Digital Credential API exposes a one-time user-mediated end-to-end encrypted communication channel from websites, to digital wallet applications, and back to websites. It is designed to be a better option than established lower-level communication channels like custom schemes, QR codes, and server-to-server network communication. How exactly this channel is used is up to the wallet applications and host operating system, but we are designing it to be suitable for conveying presentations of digital credentials such as claims in mobile driver’s licenses.

> 02.  Do features in your specification expose the minimum amount of information
>      necessary to implement the intended functionality?

> A primary use case of the digital credentials API is for selective disclosure of identity properties such as a cryptographic attestation that the user holds a California driver’s license of an adult. The use of selective disclosure, however, is a decision for the verifier website, wallet and credential issuer based on the use case. There are legitimate scenarios, such as creating or recovering an account on a government website, where uniquely identifiable and potentially non-resettable PII is potentially exposed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A primary use case of the digital credentials API is for selective disclosure of identity properties such as a cryptographic attestation that the user holds a California driver’s license of an adult. The use of selective disclosure, however, is a decision for the verifier website, wallet, and credential issuer, based on the use case. There are legitimate scenarios, such as creating or recovering an account on a government website, where uniquely identifiable and potentially non-resettable PII might be exposed.
```

> 04.  How do the features in your specification deal with sensitive information?

> Today online identity verification (eg. for KYC) is usually done by submitting photos of government identity documents (for example, uploading photos containing the PII via the web’s `<input type=file>` mechanism. Due to the privacy and security limits of this approach, credential issuers and verifiers are working to move to the use of wallet applications which can do selective disclosure of cryptographically attested properties. Today those approaches rely on generic web->app communication paths like custom schemes and server-to-server communication. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Today, online identity verification (e.g., for KYC) is usually done by submitting photos of government identity documents (for example, uploading photos containing the PII via the web’s `<input type=file>` mechanism. Due to the privacy and security limits of this approach, credential issuers and verifiers are working to move to the use of wallet applications which can selectively disclose cryptographically-attested properties. Today, those approaches rely on generic web→app communication paths like custom schemes and server-to-server communication. 
```

The use of wallets aims to improve on the status quo of uploading images in a number of ways:

>  * Enable the use of selective disclosure (eg. for more privacy-friendly age 18+ verification)
>  * Enable the PII to be end-to-end encrypted between the wallet application and the relevant verification server
>  * Enable the use of request authentication where a wallet is required to cryptographically verify that the requester has permission to access the credential

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 * Enable selective disclosure (e.g., for more privacy-friendly age≥18 verification)
 * Enable end-to-end PII encryption between the wallet application and the relevant verification server
 * Enable request authentication, where a wallet is required to cryptographically verify that the requester has permission to access the credential
```

Further, this specification aims to improve over the existing communication channels used by websites to talk to wallet apps by:

>  * Enabling browsers and operating systems to provide meaningful credential selection and permission screens to users prior to wallet applications becoming aware of the presentation request
>  * Securely communicate the origin of the requesting site to the wallet application so that it can implement it’s own MITM protection with support of WebPKI

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 * Enabling browsers and operating systems to provide meaningful credential selection and permission screens to users, prior to wallet applications becoming aware of the presentation request
 * Securely communicating the origin of the requesting site to the wallet application, so that it can implement its own MITM protection with support of WebPKI
```
